St. Matthew Passion (BWV 244)

Part One

1. Aria-Chorus and Choral
(The Daughter Zion, the Believers)
Come, you Daughters of Zion, help me lament;
look - At whom? - at the Bridegroom;
look at him - As how? - just like a lamb!
look - At what? - look at the patience;
look - Where? - on our guilt;
look at him, out of love and favour,
bearing the wood of the cross himself!
 O innocent Lamb of God,
 slaughtered on the beam of the cross,
 always found to be patient,
 however much you were despised.
 you have borne all sin;
 otherwise, we would have to despair.
 Have mercy on us, O Jesus!
("O Lamm Gottes unschuldig," verse 1)

2. Evangelist
When Jesus had brought this discourse to a close, he said to his disciples:

Jesus
You know that after two days it will be Passover, and the Son of Man will be handed over, so that he may be crucified.

3. Chorale
Most beloved Jesus, what wrong have you committed,
that such a severe judgment is pronounced?
What is the trespass; for what sort of misdeeds
have you be caught?
("Herzliebster Jesu," verse 1)

4a. Evangelist
Then the chief priests and the scripture experts and the elders among the people gathered in the palace of the high priest, who was called Caiaphas, and held council on how with cunning they might seize and kill Jesus. But they said:

4b. Chorus I & II
By no means during the festival, so that there won't be an insurrection among the people.

4c. Evangelist
Now when Jesus was at Bethany, in the house of Simon the leper, a woman who had a glass jar with precious water appoach him and poured it on his head, as he sat at table. When his disciples saw that, they became angry and said:

4d. Chorus I
What purpose does this waste serve? This water might have been sold for a great sum and given to the poor.

4e. Evangelist
When Jesus noticed that, he said to them:

4f. Jesus
Why do you trouble the woman? She has done me a good deed. The poor you will always have with you; but me you will not always have. The reason why she has poured this water on my body is that I am going to be buried. Truly, I say to you: wherever this good news is preached in the entire world, they will also, in memorial of her, tell of what she has done.

5. Recitative A (Chorus I)
You dear Saviour, you:
if your disciples foolishly pick a quarrel
because this good woman wants to prepare
your body with salve
for the grave,
then let me in the meantime pour,
from the rivers of tears in my eyes
a stream of precious water upon your head!

6. Aria A (Chorus I)
Penitence and remorse
grinds my sinful heart in pieces,
so that my teardrops bring forth
spices acceptable
to you, faithful Jesus.

7. Evangelist
Then one of the Twelve, named Judas Iscariot, went up to the chief priests and said:

Judas
What will you give me? I will betray him to you.

Evangelist
And they offered him thirty pieces of silver. And from then on he sought opportunity where he might betray him.

8. Aria S (Chorus II)
Bleed away, you loving heart!
Oh! a child that you have reared,
who has suckled at your breast,
threatens to murder its caretaker,
for the child has become a serpent.

9a. Evangelist
But on the first day of the Festival of Unleavened Bread the disciples approached Jesus and said to him:

9b. Chorus I
Where do you want us to prepare for you to eat the Passover lamb?

9c. Evangelist
He said:

Jesus
Go forth into the city to a certain one and say to him: the Master would have us say to you, my time is at hand; I will keep the Passover at your house with my disciples.

Evangelist
And the disciples did as Jesus had commanded them, and prepared the Passover lamb. And in the evening he sat down at table with the Twelve. And as they ate, He said:

Jesus
Truly I say to you: one among you will betray me.

9d. Evangelist
And they became very distressed, and started, each and every one among them, to say to him:

9e. Chorus I
Lord, am I the one?

10. Chorale
I am the one, I should atone:
bound, hand and foot,
in hell.
The scourges and the bonds
and what you have endured -
my soul has merited that.
("O Welt, sieh heir dein Leben," verse 5)

11. Evangelist
He answered, saying:

Jesus
He who dips his hand in the bowl with me will betray me. The Son of Man is going forth, indeed, as it is written of him; yet, woe to the man by whom the Son of Man is betrayed! It would be better for him if this same man had never even been born.

‍Evangelist
Then Judas, who betrayed him, answered, saying:

Judas
Am I the one, rabbi?

Evangelist
He said to him:

Jesus
You are saying so.

Evangelist
But as they ate, Jesus took the bread, gave thanks and broke it and handed it to the disciples, saying:

Jesus
Take, eat; this is my body.

Evangelist
And he took the cup and gave thanks, handing it to them and saying:

Jesus
Drink from this, all of you; this is my blood of the new testament, which is shed for many for the forgiveness of sins. I say to you: from now on I shall  drink no more from this fruit of the grapevine, until the day when I shall drink it new with you in my Father's kingdom.

12. Recitative S (Chorus I)
Though my heart swims in tears
because Jesus takes leave of me,
still his Testament makes me glad:
his flesh and blood - o treasure -
he passes on to me, into my hands.
How he fares in the world with his own people,
he cannot mean any harm,
just so does he love them until the end.

13. Aria S (Chorus I)
I will give my heart to you;
sink into it, my Salvation!
I will immerse myself in you;
even if to you the world is too small,
ah then to me you shall alone
be more than the world and heaven.

14. Evangelist
And after they had rendered the song of praise, they went out to the Mount of Olives. Then Jesus said to them:

Jesus
This very night you will all be offended at me. For it is written: "I will strike the shepherd, and the sheep of the flock will be scattered." But when I rise again from the dead, I will go forth before you to Galilee.

15. Chorale
Recognise me, my Guardian,
my shepherd; accept me!
From you, source of all good things,
much good has come to me.
Your mouth has refreshed me
with milk and sweet fare;
your spirit has endowed me
with many a heavenly delight.
("O Haupt voll Blut und Wunden," verse 5)

16. Evangelist
But Peter answered, saying to him:

Peter
Even were they all to be offended at you, still I will never be offended.

Evangelist
Jesus said to him:

Jesus
Truly, I say to you: this very night, before the cock crows, you will disavow me three times.

Evangelist
Peter said to him:

Peter
And should I have to die with you, I will not disavow you even then.

‍Evangelist
All the disciples said similar things.

17. Chorale
I will stand here deside you,
please do not despise me!
I will not take leave of you,
When your heart breaks.
When your heart turns pale
in the final deathblow,
Then I will embrace you
in my arm and bosom.
("O Haupt voll Blut und Wunden," verse 6)

18. Evangelist
Then Jesus came with them to a villa, which was called Gethsemane, and said to his disciples:

Jesus
Sit here, until I go over there and pray.

Evangelist
And he took with him Peter and the two sons of Zebedee  and began to grieve and lose heart. Then Jesus said to them:

Jesus
My soul is distressed, to the point of death; remain here and stay alert with me!

19. Recitative T (Chorus I) and Chorus II
O agony!
Here the afflicted heart trembles;
how it sinks to the ground, how his face pales!
What is the cause of all this torments?
The Judge leads him before judgment seat.
There is no comfort, no helper, none.
Oh! My sins have struck you;
He suffers all the sorrows of hell,
he is expected to pay for others' robbery.
I, oh Lord Jesus, am at fault for this torment,
that you are enduring.
Oh if only my love for you were able,
my Salvation, to alleviate or help you to bear
your trembling and your faintheartedness,
how happily would I remain here!
("Herzliebster Jesu," verse 3)

20. Aria T (Chorus I) and Chorus II
I will stay alert beside my Jesus;
  - our sins fall asleep, then -
For my death
the anguish of his soul atones;
his grieving makes me joyful.
  - That is why to us his meritorious suffering
 must be downright bitter, and yet sweet. -

21. Evangelist
And Jesus went forward a little, fell down on his face, and prayed, saying:

Jesus
My Father, if it is possible, then make this cup pass from me; yet, not as I will, but rather as you will.

22. Recitative B (Chorus II)
The Saviour falls down before his Father;
thereby he lifts me and everyone
from our Fall
up to God's grace again.
He is prepared to drink
the cup,
death's bitterness,
into which the sins of this world
are poured, stinking repulsively,
since it is our dear God's will.

23. Aria B (Chorus II)
Happily will I be so kind as
to accept the cross and cup,
indeed, I drink following the example of the Saviour.
For his mouth,
which flows with milk and honey,
has sweetened the grounds
and the bitter humiliation of suffering,
by the first sip.

24. Evangelist
And he came to his disciples and found them asleep and said to them:

Jesus
Were you all unable, to stay alert with me for one hour? Stay alert and pray, that you all do not fall into adversity! The spirit is willing, but the flesh is weak.

Evangelist
For a second time he went forward and prayed, saying:

Jesus
My Father, if it is not possible for this cup to pass  from me unless I drink it, then your will be done.

25. Chorale
What my God wills, that always be done;
His will, it is for the best;
he is prepared to save those
who believe in him steadfastly.
He saves them from anguish, this upright God,
and chastises in measure.
Whoever trusts in God, and builds upon Him steadfastly,
him He will not forsake.
("Was mein Gott will, das g'scheh allzeit," verse 1)

26. Evangelist
And he came and found them asleep again, and their eyes were heavy with sleep. And he left them and went forward once more and prayed for the third time, speaking the same words. Then he came to his disciples and said to them:

Jesus
Oh! do you now want to sleep and rest? Look, the hour is here when the Son of Man will be given over into the hands of the sinners. Get up, let's go; look, there he is, the one who will betray me.

Evangelist
And while he was still speaking, look: Judas, one of the twelve, came, and with him a great band, with swords and clubs, from the chief priests and the elders of the people. And the betrayer had given them a sign, saying: "The man I shall kiss, he is the one - seize him!" And immediately he approached Jesus and said:

Judas
Greetings to you, rabbi!

Evangelist
And kissed him. But Jesus said to him:

Jesus
My friend, why have you come?

Evangelist
Then they stepped forward and laid their hands on Jesus and seized him.

27a. Aria SA (Chorus I) and Chorus II
My Jesus is now captured, then.
Leave him, stop, don't bind him!
Moon and light
has set in agony,
since my Jesus is captured.
They lead him away; he is bound.

27b. Chorus I & II
Are lightning and thunder
vanished in the clouds?
Open up the fiery bottomless pit, O hell;
smash, ruin, swallow up, break to pieces
with sudden fury
the false betrayer, the murderous blood!

28. Evangelist
And look: one of those who were with Jesus, put his hand out upon his sword, and struck the high priest's servant, cutting off one of his ears. Then Jesus said to him:

Jesus
Put your sword back in its place; for whoever takes up the sword, he shall perish by the sword. Or do you think that I couldn't ask of my Father that he send me more than twelve legions of angels? But how then would scripture be fulfilled? This is the way it has to go.

‍Evangelist
At that hour Jesus said to the bands:

Jesus
You have gone out with swords and with clubs to ensnare me, as though to a murderer; yet daily in the Temple I have sat with you teaching, and you did not seize me. But all of this has taken place, that the scriptures of of the prophets would be fulfilled.

Evangelist
Then all the disciples deserted him and fled.

29. Chorale
O humankind, bewail your great sin,
for which Christ gave up his Father's bosom
and came to earth,
Of a virgin pure and tender
he was born here for us;
it was his will that he become the mediator,
The dead he gave life,
and in so doing put away all illness
until the time pressed forth
that he would be sacrificed for us,
bearing the heavy burden of our sins
long indeed upon the cross.
("O Mensch, bewein dein Sünde groß," verse 1)

Part Two

30. Aria A (Chorus I) and Chorus II
Oh, now my Jesus is gone!
Where then is your beloved gone,
O you most beautiful among women?
Is it possible, can I bear to look?
Where has your beloved turned to?
Oh! my lamb in tiger-claws,
oh! where is my Jesus gone?
We will seek him with you.
Oh! What shall I tell my soul
when it anxiously questions me?
Oh! where is my Jesus gone?
(Song of Solomon 6:1)

31. Evangelist
But those who had seized Jesus led him to the high priest Caiaphas, where the scripture experts and elders had gathered. But Peter followed him from a distance, up to the palace of the high priest, and went in and sat with the servants, so he might see where this would end up. But the chief priests and elders and the entire council sought false testimony against Jesus, so that they might kill him, and they found none.

32. Chorale
For me the world has has miscarried justice
with lies and with false declaration,
with many nets and secret snares.
Lord, attend to me
in this danger;
guard me in the face of malice!
("In dich hab ich gehoffet, Herr," verse 5)

33. Evangelist
And although many false testifiers stepped forward, they found none. Finally, two false testifiers stepped forward, declaring:

Testifiers
He has said: I am able to break down the Temple of God and build it in three days.

Evangelist
And the high priest stood up and said to him:

High Priest
Do you answer nothing to what these men are testifying against you?

Evangelist
But Jesus remained silent.

34. Recitative T (Chorus II)
My Jesus remains silent
at false lies,
in order thereby to show us
that his merciful will
is inclined to suffer for us,
and that we in similar pain
should be like him
and remain silent in persecution.

35. Aria T (Chorus II)
Patience!
When false tongues stab me.
If I should suffer, against any fault of mine,
disgrace and derision,
ah, then may our dear God avenge
my heart's innocence.

36a. Evangelist
And the high priest answered, saying to him:

High Priest
I adjure you by the living God that you tell us whether you are the Christ, the Son of God!

Evangelist
Jesus said to him:

Jesus
You are saying so. Yet I say to you all: From now on it will take place that you will see the Son of Man sitting at the right hand of the Power and coming on the clouds of heaven.

Evangelist
Then the high priest rent his clothing and said:

High Priest
He has blasphemed God; what further need do we have of testimony? Look, now you have heard his blasphemy of God. What does it seem to you?

Evangelist
They answered, saying:

36b. Chorus I & II
He is deserving of death!

36c. Evangelist
Then they spat out in his face and struck him with fists. But some struck him in the face and said:

36d. Chorus I & II
Prophesy to us, Christ: who is it the one that struck you?

37. Chorale
Who has struck you so,
my Salvation, and beat you up
so badly, causing plague-spots?
You are by no means a sinner,
like we and our children are;
you do not know of any misdeeds.
("O Welt, sieh heir dein Leben," verse 3)

38a. Evangelist
But Peter sat outside, in the courtyard of the palace; and a maid approached him and said:

Maid I
And you, too, were with that Jesus from Galilee.

Evangelist
He he denied it before them all, saying:

Peter
I do not know what you're talking about.

Evangelist
But when he went out to the door, another maid saw him and said to those who were there:

Maid II
This one, too, was with that Jesus of Nazareth.

Evangelist
And he denied it once more, taking an oath to it:

Peter
I do not know of the man.

Evangelist
And after a little while, those who were standing there stepped forward and said to Peter:

38b. Chorus II
Truly, you are also one of them; for your way of speaking betrays you.

38c. Evangelist
Then he started to curse at himself and to take an oath:

Peter
I do not know of the man.

Evangelist
And immediately the cock crowed. Then Peter remembered the words of Jesus, when he said to him: "Before the cock has crowed, you will disavow me three times." And Peter went out and wept bitterly.

39. Aria A (Chorus I)
Have mercy, my God,
for the sake of my tears!
Look here - my heart and eyes
weep before you bitterly.
Have mercy, have mercy!

40. Chorale
Though I have turned aside from you,
I do, indeed, come back;
Your Son has indeed reconciled the ledger for us
by his fear, and his death pains.
I do not disavow my debt;
but Your grace and favour
is much greater than the sin
that I find ever within myself.
("Werde munter, mein Gemüte," verse 6)

41a. Evangelist
When morning arrived, however, all the chief priests and the elders of the people held a council about Jesus, so that they might kill him. And they bound him, led him forth and handed him over to the governor, Pontius Pilate. When Judas, who had betrayed him, saw this, that he had been condemned to death, it made him remorseful, and he brought back the thirty pieces of silver to the chief priests and elders, saying:

Judas
I have done evil by betraying innocent blood.

‍Evangelist
They said:

41b. Chorus I & II
What has that got to do with us? You see to it, then!

41c. Evangelist
And throwing the pieces of silver into the Temple, he left, went away, and hanged himself. But the high priests took the pieces of silver and said:

High Priests
It isn't proper that we put them into the offering box, for it is blood money.

42. Aria B (Chorus II)
Give me back my Jesus!
Look, the lost son
throws the money, the wages for murder,
down to your feet!

43. Evangelist
But they held a council and bought a potter's field with them for the burial of pilgrims. That is why this same field has been called the Field of Blood to this day. And so is fulfilled what is told by the prophet Jeremiah, when he said: "They have taken thirty pieces of silver, with which the Sold One was paid for, whom they bought from the children of Israel, and have given them for a potter's field, as the Lord has commanded me." But Jesus stood before the governor; and the governor questioned him, saying:

Pilate
Are you the King of the Jews?

Evangelist
But Jesus said to him:

Jesus
You are saying so.

Evangelist
And when he was accused by the chief priests and elders, he answered nothing. Then Pilate said to him:

Pilate
Do you not hear how harshly they accuse you?

Evangelist
And he answered him not to one word, insomuch that even the governor was greatly amazed.

44. Chorale
Command your ways,
and whatever weighs down your heart,
to the most faithful caretaking of all,
from the One who guides heaven,
He who grants clouds, air, and winds
their ways, course, and route -
he will also find ways
where you can set feet.
("Befiel du deine Wege," verse 1)

45a. Evangelist
But during the Festival the governor was accustomed to releasing a prisoner to the people, whomever they wished. But at that time he had a prisoner, a standout from the others, who was called Barabbas. And when they were gathered, Pilate said to them:

Pilate
Which one do you want me to release to you? Barabbas; or Jesus, of whom it is said, "he is the Christ"?

Evangelist
For he was well aware that they had handed him over out of envy. And when he was sitting on the judgment seat, his wife sent word to him:

Pilate's Wife
Have nothing to do with this righteous one; I have suffered much today on his account!

Evangelist
But the chief priests and the elders persuaded the people that they should ask for Barabbas and destroy Jesus. Now at this the governor answered, saying to them:

Pilate
Of these two, which one do you want me to have to release to you?

Evangelist
They said:

Chorus I & II
Barabbas!

Evangelist
Pilate said to them:

Pilate
What, then, should I do with Jesus, of whom it is said, "he is the Christ"?

Evangelist
They all said:

45b. Chorus I & II
Have him crucified!

46. Chorale
How full of wonder is this punishment!
The good shepherd suffers for the sheep.
The Lord, the righteous one, pays the debt
for his servants.
("Herzliebster Jesu," verse 4)

47. Evangelist
The governor said:

Pilate
What evil thing has he done, then?

48. Recitative S (Chorus I)
He has done good to us all;
the blind he gave sight,
the lame he made able to go about;
he told us his Father's Word,
he drove demons away,
the distressed he has helped to their feet;
He received and accepted the sinners,
Nothing else has my Jesus done!

49. Aria S (Chorus I)
Out of love, my Savior is willing to die -
He knows not a single sin -
so that eternal ruin
and the punishment of the Day of Judgment,
would not remain upon my soul.

50a. Evangelist
But they shouted out yet more, saying:

50b. Chorus I & II
Have him crucified!

50c. Evangelist
But when Pilate saw that he could do nothing - rather, that a much greater commotion was developing - he took water and washed his hands before the people and said:

Pilate
I am innocent of the blood of this righteous one - you see to it!

Evangelist
Then the entire people answered, saying:

50d. Chorus I & II
His blood come over us and our children.

50e. Evangelist
Then he released Barabbas to them; but Jesus he had scourged, and handed him over so that he would be crucified.

51. Recitative A (Chorus II)
For the love of God!
Here the Savior stands, bound.
O scourging, o blows, o wounds!
You executioners, halt!
Does not the soul's agony,
the sight of such misery soften you?
Oh indeed! you have a heart
that must be like the torture column,
and a great deal harsher still.
Have mercy; halt!

52. Aria A (Chorus II)
If the tears of my cheeks cannot
achieve anything,
o, then take in my heart!
But let it, at the streams -
when the wounds of Jesus generously bleed -
also be the offering basin!
  
53a. Evangelist
Then the governor's soldiers took Jesus with them into the hall of judgment and the entire band gathered about him, and undressed him and laid on him a purple cloak, and braided a crown of thorns and placed it on his head; and placed a reed in his right hand and kneeled before him, deriding him and saying:

53b. Chorus I & II
Greetings to you, King of the Jews!

53c. Evangelist
And spat on him, and took the reed and struck his head with it.

54. Chorale
O head full of blood and wounds,
full of agony and full of scorn;
O head, bound in derision
with a crown of thorns;
O head - at other times adorned beautifully
with highest honor, and decoration,
but now highly disgraced:
my greetings to you!

You noble face - before which,
at other times, stand alarmed, and shies away,
the great weight of the world -
how you are bespattered,
How you are gone pale!
Who has blemished your eye's gleam,
which no other gleam can equal -
so dreadfully?
("O Haupt voll Blut und Wunden," verses 1 & 2)

55. Evangelist
And when they had ridiculed him, they took the cloak off him and put his own clothing on him, and led him forth, that they might crucify him. And as they were going out, they found a man from Cyrene named Simon; they coerced him to bear Jesus' cross for him.

56. Recitative B (Chorus I)
Yes surely, the flesh and blood in us must
be coerced to the cross;
the more good the cross does our souls,
the more bitterly it is received.

57. Aria B (Chorus I)
So I will say, "Come, sweet cross",
my Jesus, give it ever here!
If my suffering at any point seems too heavy to me,
then you will help me bear it myself.

58a. Evangelist
And when they came to the place named Golgotha, which translated as "Place of Skulls", they gave him vinegar mixed with gall to drink; and when he tasted it, he did not want to drink it. But having crucified him, they parted his clothes and casts lots for them, so that what is told by the prophets would be fulfilled: "They have parted my clothing among themselves, and about my garment they have cast lots." And they sat there keeping guard over him. And above his head they tacked up, written, the reason for his death, namely: "This is Jesus, the King of the Jews." And then two murderers were crucified with him, one on the right and one on the left. But those passing by scoffed him, shaking their heads and saying:

58b. Chorus I & II
You who destroy the Temple of God and builds it in three days, save yourself! If you God's Son, then climb down from the cross!

58c. Evangelist
Similarly also the chief priests derided him along with the scripture experts and elders, saying:

58d. Chorus I & II
Others he has saved, and he cannot save himself. If he is the King of Israel, then he should climb down from the cross now and then we will believe him. He trusted in God - who may redeem him now, should He desire him - for he has said: "I am God's Son."

58e. Evangelist
Similarly also the murderers who were crucified with him reviled him.

59. Recitative A (Chorus I)
Oh Golgotha, unhallowed Golgotha!
The Lord of glory
must be ruined here here disgracefully;
the blessing and the Salvation of the world
is set up on the cross as a curse.
The creator of heaven and earth
shall be withdrawn from earth and air.
Here innocence must die guilty;
this disturbs my soul;
oh Golgotha, unhallowed Golgotha!

60. Aria A (Chorus I) and Chorus II
Look, Jesus has stretched out his hands
to embrace us,
come! - Where to? - in Jesus' arms
seek redemption, take in mercy;
seek! - Where? - in Jesus' arms.
Live, die, rest here,
you forsaken chicks, you;
remain - Where? - in Jesus' arms.

61a. Evangelist
And from the sixth hour on, there was a darkness over the entire land, until the ninth hour. And at the ninth hour, Jesus cried out loudly, saying:

Jesus
Eli, Eli, lama sabachthani?

Evangelist
That is: "My God, my God, why have you forsaken me?" But some who were standing there, when they heard this, said:

61b. Chorus I
He is calling to Elijah!

61c. Evangelist
And promptly one of them ran and took a sponge and filled it with vinegar, and put it on a reed, and gave him to drink. But the others said:

61d. Chorus II
Wait! Let us see: might Elijah come and save him?

61e. Evangelist
But Jesus again shouted out loudly, and departed this life.

62. Chorale
When some day I am to part from this world,
then do not part from me;
when I am to suffer death,
then do make your appearance!
When in my heart I feel
the most afraid of all,
then tear me out of my fears
by dint of your fear and pain!
("O Haupt voll Blut und Wunden," verse 9)

63a. Evangelist
And look, the veil of the Temple rent in two pieces, from top to bottom. And the earth quaked, and the rocks rent, and the graves opened, and the bodies of many saints sleeping there arose and went out of the graves after his resurrection and came into the holy city and appeared to many. But when the captain and those who were with him safeguarding Jesus saw the earthquake and what was taking place there, they were exceedingly frightened and said:

63b. Chorus I & II
Truly, this one was God's Son.

63c. Evangelist
And there were many women looking on, from afar, who had followed Jesus from Galilee and served him, among whom was Mary Magdalene, and Mary the mother of James and Joses, and the mother of the children of Zebedee. But in the evening came a rich man of Arimathea, called Joseph, who was also a disciple of Jesus; he went to Pilate and asked him for Jesus' corpse. Then Pilate commanded that it should be given to him.

64. Recitative B (Chorus I)
In the evening, when it was cool,
Adam's Fall became manifest;
in the evening the Savior demolishes him.
In the evening the dove came back,
bearing an olive leaf in its mouth.
O lovely time! O evening hour!
The peace treaty is now made with God,
for Jesus has accomplished his godly aims in dying on the cross.
His corpse comes to rest,
oh! dear soul, ask for the favor:
go, let the death-stricken Jesus be given to you;
o wholesome, o precious remembrance!

65. Aria B (Chorus I)
Make yourself pure, my heart,
I wish to bury Jesus himself inside my heart.
For within me shall he now,
ever and ever,
have his sweet rest.
World, get out of my heart; let Jesus in!

66a. Evangelist
And Joseph took the body and wrapped it in a clean linen shawl and laid it in his own new grave, which he had hewn in a rock; and he rolled a great stone before the door of the grave, and went away. But Mary Magdalene was there and the other Mary, sitting over against the grave. When the next day arrived, the  one that followed after the day of preparation, the chief priests and Pharisees all together came to Pilate, saying:

66b. Chorus I & II
Lord, we have kept in mind that when he was still living this seducer said: "I will rise again after three days." Command therefore that the grave be secured until the third day, so that his disciples will not come and steal him and say to the people, "he is risen from the dead," and the final deception become greater than the first!

66c. Evangelist
Pilate said to them:

Pilate
There, the guards are yours; go forth and make it secure, as well as you know how!

‍Evangelist
They went forth and secured the grave with guards and sealed the stone.

67. Recitative BTAS (Chorus I) and Chorus II
Now the Lord is laid to rest.
 - My Jesus, good night! -
The trouble is over that our sins have caused him.
 - My Jesus, good night! -
O hallowed bones of Jesus,
look, how I bewail you with penitence and remorse -
that my Fall has brought you to such anguish!
 - My Jesus, good night! -
You bones of Jesus, please have lifelong, a thousand thanks for your suffering,
for having valued the salvation of my soul so highly.
 - My Jesus, good night! -
 
68. Chorus I & II
With tears we sit down
and call to you in the grave:
"you rest in peace, in peace rest!"
You all rest, you worn-out members!
"you rest in peace, rest well!"
Your grave and tombstone
shall be to our anxious conscience
a comfortable resting cushion
and the soul's resting place.
"you all rest in peace, rest well!"
Highly contented,
There with highest pleasure our eyes will fall into slumber.