Journey North

Our Imperial Majesty's second year, autumn, first day of the month, an adjusted eighth,

I, Master Du, was to set off on a journey north, over vast uncertain space to see my family.

In these times we have met with great affliction, free days are few in court or countryside.

I consider the undue grant of special grace, how an edict permitted return to my humble home.

I went to the palace gates to take my leave, shaken with awe, it was long ere I could go.

Though I lack the qualities for offering criticism, I feared lest my ruler overlook some matter.

My ruler is true lord of the Restoration, sedulously striving indeed to manage affairs.

The revolt of the eastern Hu is not over, and your subject Du Fu was stung with fury.

I wiped away tears, yearning for the court-in-exile, and my course was still an uncertain blur.

Heaven and Earth bear wounds and scars, when will our misery ever cease?

With slow steps I traversed the field paths, the smoke of hearths, far and faint in the gloom.

Those I met had mostly suffered wounds, they groaned and kept on streaming with blood.

I turned my head back to Fengxiang County, late in the day its banners appeared and faded from view.

I climbed the folds of cold mountains ahead, often finding watering holes for my horse.

I entered Bin's moor down at the base of the ground, the Jing's waters churned through its midst.

Fierce tigers stood before me, the gray slopes split when they roared.

From chrysanthemums hung this autumn's blooms, the rock bore the ruts of ancient carts.

The blue clouds stirred high spirits, experiences in seclusion may still be enjoyed.

Mountain berries in many tiny bits grew in stretches mixed with chestnut oaks.

Some were red like cinnabar pebbles, others, black like spots of lacquer.

Wherever the rain and dew brings moisture fruits form, the sweet and the bitter alike.

I thought of Peach Blossom Spring, so remote, increasing sighs over the blunders of my life.

From the rises I gazed to Fu's Altar, which emerged and sank away as I crossed valley and cliff.

I had already gone on to the shores of a stream, and my servant was still in the tips of the trees.

Owls screeched in the brown mulberry trees, ground squirrels folded hands by their scattered dens.

In the depths of night I passed through a battlefield, where the cold moon shone on white bones.

An army of a million at Tong Pass — back then they scattered so swiftly!

In consequence half the folk of Qin were destroyed and made into non-human things.

What's more I fell into the dust of the Hu, coming home, my hair is all streaked with gray.

A year has passed, and I reach my thatched cottage, wife and children's clothes patched in a hundred places.

Stirred to weeping, the sound of pines replies, and mournful streams join our secret sobs.

The son whom I always have doted on, his complexion is whiter than snow.

Seeing his dad, he turns his face away weeping, filthy and greasy, no socks on his feet.

By the bed my two young daughters have a patchwork that goes just below their knees.

An ocean scene with its waves torn, a former embroidery, its sequence of panels shifted.

Tianwu and the Purple Phoenix were upside down on their short tunics.

I, the old man, was feeling bad and lay several days with vomiting and diarrhea.

Of course I had money in my purse to save you from shivering in the cold.

I also undid packets of powder and mascara, sheets and blankets were amply arrayed.

A light returned to my gaunt wife's face, and the innocent girls combed their own hair.

They imitated their mother in everything, with morning make-up smeared on liberally.

After some time they put on rouge and painted wide brows helter-skelter.

Back alive, I face these children and almost forget my hunger and thirst.

Asking what happened, scrambling to pull my whiskers, who could glare or scold them just then?

I think back when I was among the rebels and now gladly accept all this chaos and noise.

Being newly returned comforts me for a while — how could I bring myself to discuss our livelihood?

His Majesty still is coated with exile's dust, how soon will we stop the training of troops?

I look up and observe Heaven's aspect changing, sensing how baleful vapors clear all around.

From the Northwest comes a shadowy wind, somberly following the Uighurs.

Their king wants them to serve and aid, by custom they excel in the cavalry charge.

They have sent us five thousand troops, and driven along ten thousand horses.

Of this sort a few are valuable, all the world admires their resolute bravery.

They always use "hawk-bounders," that smash the enemy swifter than an arrow.

His Highness's heart prefers to wait, doing nothing, all spirit is virtually lost in current policy debates.

Luoyang can be taken as easily as pointing to the palm, the Western Capital is not even worth seizing.

The Imperial Army begs to strike deeply, their stored up sharpness should be unleashed en masse.

With this move we can clear Qingzhou and Xuzhou, then we can immediately swallow Heng and Jie.

Frost and dew gather in the vast heavens, there is stern deadliness in the atmosphere of justice.

Disaster turns to the Year for Destroying the Hu; the situation produces the Month for Seizing the Hu.

How can the Hu's fated span last long? — it is not fitting that Imperial Rule be cut off.

I think back to when the panic first began, what happened was different from all precedent.

The corrupt minister at last was chopped to mince, and his evil partners were then swept away.

We would never have heard of Xia or Yin's decline had they executed Bao and Da midway.

Zhou and Han achieved a second rising — Xuan and Guang were truly discerning and wise.

Undaunted was General Chen Xuanli, with spear and axe, he exercised loyal ardor.

Were it not for you, the people would all be gone, yet the dynasty still lives unto this day.

Cold and dreary is Datong Palace, desolate is the White Beast Gate.

The people in the capital gaze for the Kingfisher Glory, auspicious vapors head toward the gilded palace turrets.

Truly divinity hangs about the imperial tombs, rites of sweeping and sprinkling will not be omitted.

Glorious is the legacy of  Taizong — what he established is exceedingly vast and enduring.